https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/API-Reference

# selecting
*select('css-selector')* or *selectAll('css-selector')*

**chaining**: d3 methods return the object they changed so you can chain them
d3.select('css-selector').style('css-tag', 'value')

Selections will always return an array containing an array. A selection is an array of groups, and each group is an array of elements. So `selection[0]` is the single group returned, and this group organizes the DOM elements. The only way `selection[0]` will return multiple groups is if it a `selectAll()` of a selection, and the parent has multiple groups.

**nested selections** will return a hierarchical structure of the DOM elements. If you chain, e.g., d3.selectAll('tr').selectAll('td'), this will return a nested structure of the elements (an array of arrays). Nested data can map nicely to that (and has to map to that).

 - https://bost.ocks.org/mike/nest/
 - https://bost.ocks.org/mike/selection/

# joining data to html or svg elements
Tutorial at: https://bost.ocks.org/mike/bar/

```javascript
// assume that HTML contains with empty div with class 'chart'
var data = [4, 8, 15, 16, 23, 42];
var x = d3.scale.linear()
    .domain([0, d3.max(data)])
    .range([0, 420]) # probably better to get container size programmatically

var chart = d3.select('.chart') //1 selects the div with class 'chart'
    .selectAll('div') //2 defines selection: selects all divs in that div (none)
        .data(data) //3 binds data: creates an array of 6 undefined
    .enter() //4 creates objects with attr of `__data__` numbers)
    .append('div') //5 creates divs with attr of `__data__`
        .style('width', function(d) {return d * 10 + 'px'}) //6 defines style based on the joined datum (d is shorthand for `__data__`?)
        .text(function(d) {return d}) //7 defines text on data
// On step 2 you say what you "want" for it to exist.
```

`enter()` calls all data elements that do not have a paired element in the initial selection.

 - there is also an `exit()` method that calls the unmatched elements
 - the idea is that you pair data to DOM elements using some key and try to manage the data points that were not matched (e.g., by creating new DOM elements for them) and elements that were not matched (e.g., by discarding them).

When using functions for styling, you can also use the parameter `i`, as in `function(d, i)`, to index the data points. I am not yet sure if `d` and `i` are positional parameters (any name possible but keep location) or if they need to be named like this.

## svg alternative
SVG is the more common option. The tutorial is here: https://bost.ocks.org/mike/bar/2/

Unlike HTML, you need to set the coordinates for each element in an absolute way (there are helper functions for that). But you are given much more options than with HTML (different shapes, etc).

The `g` tag here (stands for group) is analogous do `div` in HTML.

# loading data
https://bost.ocks.org/mike/bar/2/

d3 has loader functions like `d3.csv`.

## asynchronicity
Loading functions are *asynchronous*, meaning you have to create a callback function for when the loader returns with the data (callback = runs when something completes). You will typically make it so that most of the chart (the parts that depend on the data) draws after the data is loaded.

## objects instead of arrays
Data will now be an object with attributes being the columns from the input file. In many cases you will need to write accessor functions to fetch the value column. For example: say that the data has a value column with the name "value". To get the maximum: `d3.max(data, function(d) {return d.value);}`

## type functions
Pass a function to the loader that will change the type of a particular column. Input and output is the data object. E.g. 
```javascript
function (data) {
    data.length = ToNumber(data.length); // or = +data.length
    return data;
}
```

# axes
https://bost.ocks.org/mike/bar/3/

# simpler alternatives

**dimple.js** is a library that functions similarly to ggplot2 (setting x and y, facets, geometries, etc). Find it here: 
