# materials

## intro
book, also online: http://alignedleft.com/tutorials/d3/
online: https://www.dashingd3js.com/table-of-contents

## advanced
book: http://nickqizhu.github.io/d3-cookbook/
list of resources, tutorials and books: https://github.com/d3/d3/wiki/Tutorials
reference: https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/API-Reference
Mike's stuff: https://bost.ocks.org/mike/selection/

# intro
d3 is a framework that maps data onto DOM objects. With d3 you pair (in most cases) SVG objects with data points and define how the data relates to some visual parameter (e.g., radius of a circle, distance from the origin on the x-axis, etc). You can use a linear scale, or another function (sqrt, log, etc).

# margin conventions
http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/3019563

Define margins at the beginning. Add a g element inside svg that will be inside the margins (ie, not overflow the margins).

Scale band has a paddingOuter component. If you want to keep a constant bandwidth, this padding has to be 0.5 of the paddingInner (they mustn't be the same!).

# selecting
*select('css-selector')* or *selectAll('css-selector')*

**chaining**: d3 methods return the object they changed so you can chain them
d3.select('css-selector').style('css-tag', 'value')

Selections will always return an array containing an array. A selection is an array of groups, and each group is an array of elements. So `selection[0]` is the single group returned, and this group organizes the DOM elements. The only way `selection[0]` will return multiple groups is if it a `selectAll()` of a selection, and the parent has multiple groups.

**nested selections** will return a hierarchical structure of the DOM elements. If you chain, e.g., d3.selectAll('tr').selectAll('td'), this will return a nested structure of the elements (an array of arrays). Nested data can map nicely to that (and has to map to that).

 - https://bost.ocks.org/mike/nest/
 - https://bost.ocks.org/mike/selection/

# binding data to html or svg elements
Tutorial at: https://bost.ocks.org/mike/bar/

```javascript
// assume that HTML contains with empty div with class 'chart'
var data = [4, 8, 15, 16, 23, 42];
var x = d3.scale.linear()
    .domain([0, d3.max(data)])
    .range([0, 420]) # probably better to get container size programmatically

var chart = d3.select('.chart') //1 selects the div with class 'chart'
    .selectAll('div') //2 defines selection: selects all divs in that div (none)
        .data(data) //3 binds data: creates an array of 6 undefined
    .enter() //4 creates objects with attr of `__data__` numbers)
    .append('div') //5 creates divs with attr of `__data__`
        .style('width', function(d) {return d * 10 + 'px'}) //6 defines style based on the joined datum (d is shorthand for `__data__`?)
        .text(function(d) {return d}) //7 defines text on data
// On step 2 you say what you "want" for it to exist.
```

`data(dataset)` will parse the data and assign data points to the initial selection. If the selection is empty, or not large enough, it will create a placeholder for each data point. These data points are represented as js objects in an array. They represent rows in the typical table/csv case, or something more if there is nested data.

The data is bound, but not in the DOM. When you select theelem with d3.select you will find a __data__ attribute. 

The data would be assigned to DOM elements in the initial selection. But if there aren't enough elements, `enter()` will create a placeholder all data elements that do not have a paired element in the initial selection. Think of this as creating a sub-selection of datapoints: select only those that do not have a DOM element paired. The next chain of commands will apply to these elements. Therefore, it will do nothing to the data points that were bound in the `data` command.

You access the data by writing anonymous functions that apply to all elements in the selection. D3 passes the data as the first parameter and the index as the second.

 - there is also an `exit()` method that creates a sub-selection of DOM elements paired to datapoints that are no longer there. Enter are arrivals, and exit are departures!
 - the idea is that you pair data to DOM elements using some key and try to manage the data points that were not matched (e.g., by creating new DOM elements for them) and elements that were not matched (e.g., by discarding them).

When using functions for styling, you can also use the parameter `i`, as in `function(d, i)`, to index the data points. I am not yet sure if `d` and `i` are positional parameters (any name possible but keep location) or if they need to be named like this.

## svg alternative
SVG is the more common option. The tutorial is here: https://bost.ocks.org/mike/bar/2/

Unlike HTML, you need to set the coordinates for each element in an absolute way (there are helper functions for that). But you are given much more options than with HTML (different shapes, etc).

The `g` tag here (stands for group) is analogous do `div` in HTML.

# multivalue maps
```javascript
d3.select("circle")
    .attr({
        cx: 0,
        cy: 0,
        fill: red
    });
```

# loading data
https://bost.ocks.org/mike/bar/2/

d3 has loader functions like `d3.csv`. The data passed to it is an object that has another object for each row. First row is interpreted as column names.

## objects instead of arrays
Data will now be an object with attributes being the columns from the input file. In many cases you will need to write accessor functions to fetch the value column. For example: say that the data has a value column with the name "value". To get the maximum: `d3.max(data, function(d) {return d.value);}`

## type functions
Pass a function to the loader that will change the type of a particular column. Input and output is the data object. E.g. 
```javascript
function (data) {
    data.length = ToNumber(data.length); // or = +data.length
    return data;
}
```

# axes
https://bost.ocks.org/mike/bar/3/

# transitions
https://github.com/d3/d3-transition

Transitions offer an interpolation between states. They function similar to selections as they expose the same kind of chaining syntax (only that some things don't work, eg append). You can chain transitions (one after the other), interrupt them, delay them, etc. You can even write your own transition functions (tweens). The API is very powerful.

```javascript
d3.select('div')
  .transition()
  .duration(100)
  .style('color', 'red')
```

Use named transitions to synchronize the transition of two or more selections.

```javascript
t = d3.transition().duration(200).style('color', 'red')
d3.select('div').transition(t)
d3.select('text').transition(t)
```

Use delay when many elements are animated at once. This will make the individual transitions more easily perceivable.

```javascript
// using index to calculate delay, dividing by dataset to make it scalable
t.delay(function(d, i) {return i * 500 / dataset.length})
```

# simpler alternatives

**dimple.js** is a library that functions similarly to ggplot2 (setting x and y, facets, geometries, etc). Find it here: 

# odd behavior for checking later
If I bind data to g elements of an axis, then when doing a transition on it it won't work.

```javascript
// ... define scale_y
axis_y = d3.axisLeft().scale(scale_y)
d3.select('#y-axis').selectAll('g')
    .data(data)
// ...here change smt with scale_y
select('#y-axis').transition().call(axis_y) // wont work


```

# keep in mind
Event passed to the callback does not contain the usual js event, but the datapoint. 

```javascript
d3.on('event_name', function(event) {
    console.log(event)  // 
    })
```

# tutorials found online
[Using D3 with HTML canvas](https://medium.freecodecamp.com/d3-and-canvas-in-3-steps-8505c8b27444#.6di6zdv5w)

 - you can't draw directly on Canvas with D3 so you create a "virtual DOM" which is simply a list of custom elements to which you bind the data and 

# examples

## sunflower seed arrangement
https://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/11478058
https://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/11463507
https://www.jasondavies.com/sunflower-phyllotaxis/

